JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
an abrupt about-face.
President Trump bans
transgender people from
serving in the military,
a surprise move drawing
criticism from both
sides of the aisle.
Then: Free from the reign of
ISIS, the Iraqi city of Mosul
grapples with a new battle,
as revenge killings push it
deeper into a cycle of violence.
TOM PORTEOUS, Deputy Program
Director, Human Rights Watch:
If you are continuing to commit
abuses with impunity, then you
are simply sowing the seeds for
the reemergence of extremism
and radicalism in Iraq.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And what
football does to the mind -- the
shocking results of a study that
found brain damage in almost all
professional football players.
All that and more on
tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: From
President Trump today,
an abrupt announcement.
He is reinstating a ban
on transgender troops,
and reopening the debate
on who gets to serve
in the U.S. military.
Word of the military policy
reversal came not from the
Pentagon, but from the president
on Twitter.
He said: "The United States
government will not accept or
allow transgender individuals
to serve in any capacity
in the U.S. military."
And he went on: "Our military
must be focused on victory,
and cannot be burdened with the
tremendous medical costs and
disruption that transgender
in the military would entail."
Candidate Trump had promised
to protect the rights
of transgender people.
White House Press Secretary
Sarah Huckabee Sanders was
asked about that today.
SARAH HUCKABEE SANDERS, INCOMING
WHITE HOUSE PRESS SECRETARY:
He's also voiced that this
is a very expensive and
disruptive policy, and based on
consultation that he's had with
his national security team, came
to the conclusion that it erodes
military readiness and unit
cohesion, and made the
decision based on that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Socially
conservative groups
welcomed the decision, but
it drew quick condemnation
from many Democrats,
including New York Congressman
Sean Patrick Maloney.
REP.
SEAN PATRICK MALONEY (D), New
York: We have heard every tired
-- every tired discriminatory
argument before, and they have
always fallen away over time in
the face of reason and decency
and equality.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Some leading
members of the president's own
party also rejected the new
ban, including Senators John
McCain and Orrin Hatch and Joni
Ernst, who served in the U.S.
military in Iraq.
ASHTON CARTER, Former
U.S. Secretary Of Defense:
I'm announcing today
that we're ending the
ban on transgender Americans
in the United States military.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All of this
comes more than a year after the
Obama administration's secretary
of defense, Ashton Carter,
announced that transgender
people would be allowed to serve
openly.
The RAND Cooperation
estimates there are up
to 6,600 transgender
troops on active duty,
with possibly another
4,000 in the Reserves.
Carter gave the armed services
until this month to adjust.
But his successor, James Mattis,
recently delayed implementation
by another six months.
The Joint Chiefs of Staff said
they need to determine whether
transgender recruits have
medical issues affecting
their ability to deploy and
meet physical standards.
Republican Congresswoman
Vicky Hartzler of Missouri
has unsuccessfully
proposed legislation
to bar medical services
for transgender troops.
REP.
VICKY HARTZLER (R), Missouri:
The bottom line is, do we need
to spend any of our precious
tax dollars on these surgeries,
when we have soldiers that are
having trouble getting body
armor and bullets?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Brynn
Tannehill is a transgender
former Navy pilot, and
director for an advocacy
group that fights for
transgender service members.
LT.
CMDR.
BRYNN TANNEHILL (RET.)
ÑMD-BOÑU.S. Navy:
What's extraordinarily
disruptive to unit
cohesion is taking people who
have unique, valuable skills
within their units, and yanking
them out of those units,
ones that are often only
one deep in their units.
And you can't replace that.
And that's what affects mission
and mission accomplishment.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The White
House indicated today
that the military will
take the lead on deciding
what becomes of transgender
people already serving.
Our own William Brangham has
reported on transgender people
serving in the military.
He joins me now to
further explain today's
move by the president.
So, William, first,
something about the term.
We are talking about
people who are transgender.
The term transition or
transitioning is also used.
Help us understand
the distinction.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: I understand
this can be confusing
for a lot of people.
Just basic facts.
To be transgender just
means that your gender
identity doesn't match
your birth certificate.
So, you're born as female, but
you do not feel you're female.
You feel like you're a male.
To transition can mean a
whole spectrum of things.
It can mean -- it's not just
the surgery people tend to think
of, and certainly not every
transgender person
has that surgery.
It can simply mean
taking hormones.
It can just mean changing your
clothes, changing your name.
So, transitioning can be an
entire spectrum from things,
from medical technologies to
just changing your
personality a little.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, we heard
the president - - the press
secretary at the White House,
Sarah Sanders, citing the
president's concerns, and
he tweeted about this.
He says it's expensive,
the cost, the disruption.
She talked about
readiness, unit cohesion.
Are those factors that the
Pentagon is concerned about?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: As far as we
know, there's no good evidence
that the Pentagon has ever
been concerned about
those two things.
On the issue of disruption,
the RAND study that you cited
in your report, they did a
study that looked at whether or
not having trans service members
would cause this disruption.
And they surveyed 18 different
countries around the world,
including the U.K., Australia,
Israel, all of whom have
trans service members,
and those countries
reported no disruptions
whatsoever, no need to
change their policies.
On the issue of cost,
the president said
this is -- I think he's
implying that somehow this
is going to cost a
fortune for the budget.
Again, this RAND study
indicated that the rough costs
per year are about $2 million
to $8 million.
That's not a lot in a $600
billion Pentagon budget.
And just for point of
comparison, let's say
those RAND numbers are
totally wrong and it's
even more.
The Pentagon right now spends
10 times that amount on Cialis
and Viagra, so just as a
point of comparison.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Another
kind of medication.
William, why is
this happening now?
Is there a sense out of the
blue the president tweeted
about this, this morning?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: It did
seem to come out of the blue.
In fact, we reached out
to the Pentagon today
to ask them about that.
And an indication of how much
they were caught flat-footed
about this, they had nothing to
say and referred us
back to the White House.
My sense is that
there's two reasons.
One, ever since the Obama
administration introduced
this change, there have
been social conservatives,
Mike Pence in particular, who
have been very resistant to it.
They think it's social
engineering of the worst kind.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The
vice president.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Exactly.
And they have fought it.
But, today, very specifically,
there was a fight in the
House amongst the GOP -- they
were trying to getting
a spending bill passed
with all sorts of goodies
that the president
wanted, including money
for his border wall.
Some deficit and defense
hawks said we need to put in a
piece of legislation that bans
transgender sex
reassignment surgery.
That was pushed back
on by the leadership.
And, apparently, some of these
members went to the president
and said, help us out with
this policy.
And he then went 10, 50 yards
further down the line and
announced this outright ban.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, again,
we see divisions inside the
Republican Party over this.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Exactly.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, finally,
William, what does this mean
for active-duty members now
who are transgender,
whether they're serving in
this country or overseas?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: That's
the great unknown.
Sarah Huckabee Sanders said,
we're working out the policy.
The Pentagon has
no comment on this.
I talked to some people today
who are in touch with trans
service members right now, and
they said that there is an
incredible feeling of fear and
panic and just uncertainty, that
you have signed up.
You might be deployed
overseas right now.
All of a sudden, you look at
your phone, the president has
tweeted that your position in
the military is over, so
big unanswered questions.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A number
of questions here.
William Brangham, we thank you.
And in the day's other news: The
Supreme Court of South Carolina
ruled that same-sex couples
deserve the same protections
from domestic violence
as heterosexual couples.
The court said that the
state's existing law
is unconstitutional.
Several other states
have already changed
their laws on the issue.
Activists expressed hope
that today's decision
encourages more to do so.
The U.S. Senate voted down a
proposal today to repeal the
Affordable Care Act two years
from now, while it
works on a replacement.
It was the latest sign that
it is going to be tougher to
win passage of a health care
reform bill than it was
just simply to get the votes
yesterday to begin debate.
We will have a full report on
this after the news summary.
President Trump took a new
verbal shot at U.S. Attorney
General Jeff Sessions today.
On Twitter, he complained that
Sessions ought to fire acting
FBI Director Andrew McCabe
for allegedly being too close
to his fired predecessor, James
Comey, and to Hillary Clinton.
Even so, White House Press
Secretary Sarah Huckabee Sanders
left open the possibility
that the president may
decide to keep Sessions.
SARAH HUCKABEE SANDERS:
He's obviously disappointed,
but also wants the attorney
general to continue
to focus on the things
the attorney general does.
Look, you can be disappointed
in someone, but still want
them to continue to do their
job.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In the past week,
the president has subjected
Sessions to daily hectoring
for recusing himself
in the Russia probe.
But at a rally last night, Mr.
Trump rejected criticism of his
own behavior, saying -- quote
- - "It is so easy to act
presidential, but that's
not going to get it done."
In Afghanistan, Taliban gunmen
killed at least 26 Afghan
soldiers today after storming an
army base in the
country's south.
The attack took place near
Kandahar, Afghanistan's
second largest city.
It came as the Taliban
has made significant
gains across the country.
Back in this country,
a bit of good news:
Republican Congressman
Steve Scalise has been
released from a Washington
hospital after being shot and
critically wounded last month.
He will now begin what
the hospital called
intensive rehabilitation.
The Louisiana lawmaker was one
of four people shot by a gunman
during a baseball practice.
He has had several surgeries.
The Federal Reserve is
keeping its standard
interest rate unchanged.
The Central Bank today cited
solid job gains, but noted that
inflation remains below the
target level.
Fed officials already raised
rates twice this year.
President Trump today
announced that the
Taiwan-based Foxconn will
build a $10 billion plant in
Wisconsin to make liquid
crystal display panels.
It could mean 3,000
jobs, if it's built.
Foxconn has not always
followed through on new
projects in the U.S.
And on Wall Street, the Dow
Jones industrial average gained
97 points to close at 21711.
The Nasdaq rose 10, and the
S&P 500 was up a fraction.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
what's next after another failed
health care vote; President
Trump signals he will pull
out of the Iran nuclear deal;
revenge killings in Iraq, the
aftermath of the fight
against ISIS; and much more.
Republicans faced another
challenge today in their efforts
to dismantle the Affordable
Care Act.
Lisa Desjardins has more.
SEN.
MITCH MCCONNELL (R-KY),
Majority Leader: This
certainly won't be easy.
Hardly anything in
this process has been.
LISA DESJARDINS: The whirlwind
process ticked on in the Senate
today, but Republicans found
themselves no closer to passing
a plan to repeal or replace
the Affordable Care Act.
Two key GOP ideas failed
by significant margins
in the past 24 hours.
First, last night, nine
Republicans voted against the
latest Senate plan, including
Senator Ted Cruz's proposal
plan to allow insurance plans
with almost no regulations.
Then today came an idea backed
by conservatives like Kentucky
senator Rand Paul, a straight
repeal in two years with
no replacement attached.
Paul said Obamacare's
relations mean options
are far too limited.
SEN.
RAND PAUL (R), Kentucky: Do you
think that the -- that every
American should get to choose,
that every American gets
to choose whether they have
insurance or not, and what kind
of insurance they have?
This is what it's about.
It's a freedom of choice.
LISA DESJARDINS: But his
straight repeal lost 45-55.
Seven Republican senators
rejected the idea.
Republican leaders
instead focused on a
longer game, reminding
their party of its pledge
to repeal Obamacare.
SEN.
JOHN THUNE (R), South
Dakota: We made a commitment
to the American people.
It's time to make
good on that promise.
LISA DESJARDINS: And it now
appears the Senate GOP's best
shot at a bill is what's known
as skinny repeal, repealing
the individual mandate,
and not much else.
That is expected to be one of
the last votes this week, and
so begins the jockeying for
what goes in it.
South Carolina Lindsey Graham
wants more block grants
for states in the plan.
SEN.
LINDSEY GRAHAM (R), South
Carolina: And if it can't do
that, I'm not voting for it.
LISA DESJARDINS: All this a
day after the Senate barely
voted to begin debate.
Today, President Trump singled
out Alaska's Lisa Murkowski
for her vote against starting
debate yesterday, tweeting that
she "really let the Republicans
and our country down yesterday.
Too bad."
Murkowski defended her vote
to The Alaska Dispatch News,
saying, "I didn't think that
we were ready for the
debate, and I have said
pretty consistently
that process really does
matter."
As it does to Democrats, like
Oregon's Ron Wyden, calling
for fixes, rather than repeal
for Obamacare.
SEN.
RON WYDEN (D), Oregon: We
all agree that the Affordable
Care Act is not perfect.
We're going to take steps
immediately to stabilize the
private insurance market.
LISA DESJARDINS: The clock is
now ticking on the 20 hours
of debate required for any
bill.
After that, any amendments
not already passed can
be tacked on in a process
known as vote-a-rama.
Senate Republican
Whip John Cornyn:
SEN.
JOHN CORNYN (R), Texas: We will
conclude one way or another
on either late Thursday or
Friday morning.
LISA DESJARDINS: That means
the Senate, and Americans
watching, have two days to weigh
in on this critical draft about
the future of health care.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm Lisa Desjardins.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It has been just
over two years since the Iran
nuclear agreement was signed
under the Obama administration.
But President Trump may very
well be on the way toward
pulling the United States out of
the deal.
John Yang has that.
JOHN YANG: Candidate Donald
Trump ran against the agreement,
but President Trump has twice
followed the State Department's
advice, and certified that
Iran is complying with it.
But now, in a Wall Street
Journal interview published
today, Mr. Trump indicates he's
willing to overrule the State
Department when the next
certification is due in October.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States: We have given
them the benefit of every doubt.
We're doing very
detailed studies.
And, personally, I have
great respect for my people.
If it was up to me,
I would have had them
noncompliant 180 days ago.
QUESTION: Do you expect
them to be declared
noncompliant next time?
DONALD TRUMP: Personally, I do.
JOHN YANG: What would it
mean if Mr. Trump said
Iran is not complying?
What's at stake here?
We get two views.
First, Rob Malley is
here in the studio.
As special assistant to
President Obama, he was the lead
senior White House negotiator
for the agreement.
He is now a vice president of
the International Crisis Group.
And joining us from
Toronto is Mark Dubowitz.
He is chief executive
of the Foundation for
Defense of Democracies,
a Washington, D.C.-based
think tank.
He has been advising the Trump
administration on Iran policy.
Rob, let me start with you.
What's your response to
what the president said?
I should point out that, in that
interview, he went on to say
that he thinks Iran is taking
advantage of this country.
He said: "They have taken
advantage of a president
named Barack Obama who
didn't know what the
hell he was doing."
ROBERT MALLEY, Middle East
Program Director, International
Crisis Group: I'll respond to
that, but let's get
the facts straight.
We have now, since President
Trump has been in office, twice,
they -- the administration
certified that Iran was
in compliance of the deal.
Twice, the administration waived
the sanctions, which is a way
of indicating that it's mutually
reciprocal.
This is the administration's
response to the fact that Iran
is doing its share, we do our
share.
Twice, the agency, the
international agency
that's responsible for
deciding whether -- decides
on compliance -- whether Iran is
in compliance with its nuclear
restrictions, the International
Atomic Energy Agency, twice
since Trump has been in office,
it has said that Iran is living
up to its deal.
And, twice, the joint
commission, which is a
commission formed by all
of the member countries
that negotiated the deal,
including the United
States, twice, including
recently, they have
said that Iran is in compliance.
So maybe the president has
information that he hasn't
shared with anyone else.
But, at this point, it's clear
that for almost every objective
observer, every objective
observer -- the subjective
observers may have another view
-- but every objective observer
has said Iran is in compliance.
So, I don't know where he
comes up with saying that he
knows, but others don't know.
Even his Cabinet disagrees,
apparently, but he knows that
Iran is not in compliance.
So, that really would
be breaking our own
obligations under the
deal, but also breaking
with our allies, which would put
us in a very difficult position.
JOHN YANG: Mark Dubowitz, you
are advising the administration.
I presume you wouldn't want
to talk about that advice,
make that advice public.
But what should the
president should do?
What do you think the
president should do when this
next certification comes up?
MARK DUBOWITZ, Foundation for
the Defense of Democracies:
So, the president should make
it very clear that Iran is not
in compliance with the deal.
It's been very clear.
And Secretary Tillerson's letter
to Congress again made it very
clear that there are incremental
violations of the deal.
The president actually didn't
certify that Iran is in full
compliance with the deal.
He merely said that Iran
meets certain conditions
that were laid by Congress,
which didn't require
full compliance.
So, my advice to the president
would be state the facts,
which is, Iran is incrementally
violating the deal, but unless
there's a material breach of the
JCPOA, the nuclear deal, don't
go to the joint commission,
don't snap back the
U.N. sanctions, but
use that noncompliance
as a predicate to roll out
a much more comprehensive
Iran policy that deals
with all forms of Iranian
malign behavior, not only
nuclear misbehavior, but Iran's
malign behavior across multiple
fronts.
That's a full, comprehensive
policy, and it gets us away
from this myopic focus on the
nuclear deal, which I think
paralyzed U.S.-Iran policy
under President Obama.
JOHN YANG: Rob Malley, myopic
focus on the nuclear deal?
Or should there be consideration
of things, a broader
consideration, as he says?
ROB MALLEY: There should,
there has been, and there
will continue to be.
I mean, what the Obama
administration, what
President Obama did was
take one issue, which
was a critical issue, not only
our national security experts,
but Israeli and other experts
said, if Iran were to rush
to a bomb, we would be in
a very difficult situation.
Let's look at the
case of North Korea.
We wouldn't want to see a North
Korea in the Persian Gulf.
So, that was a priority at
that point wasn't not to
give up on the other issues.
Let's at least make sure
that Iran is not in a
position to get a bomb.
At the same time, let's
push back on their
regional activities,
let's see what we can
do about their ballistic
missiles, but the deal itself --
and deliberately -- was about
this issue.
It wasn't a case of myopia.
It was a case of, we're
going to deal with the issue.
We solved it, at least
for the time being.
And let's work on the other
issues at the same time.
There is nothing in the nuclear
deal that would prevent us
from taking action against
Iran if it engaged in
terrorism, ballistic missiles,
human rights violations.
The question at the heart
of what the president
said is whether we are
going to continue to
honor our part of the deal,
to make sure that Iran also
honors its part and doesn't rush
to a nuclear bomb, so
that we don't have what
we now in North Korea.
North Korea, we have a country
that has a nuclear bomb,
and we have no visibility on
what they're doing.
In Iran, we have a country that
doesn't have a nuclear bomb,
and we have almost maximum
visibility as a result of
the deal in every aspect
of their nuclear program.
JOHN YANG: Mark Dubowitz,
what about that, the idea that
it's better to know what is
going on, to work within
this agreement and know
what Iran is doing?
MARK DUBOWITZ: Well, I'm glad
Rob brought up the fatally
flawed North Korea nuclear
agreement, because the
Iran nuclear agreement is
similarly fatally flawed.
It contains within it
sunset provisions, where
the restrictions of
Iran's nuclear program
actually go away over time, and
Iran can emerge, by actually
faithfully complying with the
deal, with an industrial sized
nuclear program, with near zero
nuclear breakout capability,
with a much easier covert
sneak-out capability
with an ICBM, with a
powerful economy fortified
against our ability to
use sanctions, and with
increased regional hegemony.
So, Rob is right.
The deal temporarily pushed the
Iranians further in terms of
breakout, but over the medium
term, Iran is going to emerge
with everything it wants by
faithfully complying with the
deal.
So, we don't want another
fatally flawed nuclear agreement
like we had with North Korea.
What we need to start dealing
with is this flawed agreement.
And I think the president has
already made it very clear that
he thinks this is a terrible
deal, he thinks it's
a fatally flawed deal.
And I think my advice to him
is don't certify compliance
and begin to lay the predicate
for a massive pressure campaign
and get the Iranians back
to the table to negotiate a
nuclear deal number two that
addresses some of these fatally
flawed elements of the deal,
and, by the way, give us
inspection rights into military
sites, which, right now, we
have in theory, but, in
practice, the Iranians
aren't letting us into
their military sites,
where they're likely to engage
in nuclear weaponization
activities like they have in
the past.
So, we better rectify this
fatally flawed deal, or the
Iranians are going to a nuke,
ICBMs, and they're going to have
the ability to dominate like
nothing we have seen before.
JOHN YANG: Rob Malley, what
would be the consequences?
What is at stake here?
What would be the consequences
if the president did say Iran
is not living up to this deal?
ROB MALLEY: Well, first, I
have to say, I'm a little bit
confused about argument that
Mark was making.
Is the argument that the deal is
fatally flawed and, therefore,
we shouldn't accept it, we
should walk away, we
should renegotiate it,
which would be one path?
Very dangerous.
And I won't get into that.
Or is his view, the deal is
OK for now, but in 12, 13, 14,
15 years, as some provisions
are going to expire, and
so we should think of
whether we can negotiate
what happens afterwards,
but in which case we're
going to give something
to Iranians in return.
Nobody is going to -- the
Iranians are not going to accept
to negotiate more restrictions
in exchange for nothing.
So, I think we need to clarify.
Right now, we're in a much
better position than we were at
the time President Obama took
office, because we have
these restrictions.
And according to every
inspection that has been done,
every report by the IAEA, Iran
is in compliance.
Now, if tomorrow, the president
were to decide to announce
that Iran is not in compliance,
first of all, I think we
would have a little bit of
deja vu in terms of Iraq.
I think most people in the
international community
would believe that
we're just fabricating
evidence, because we
haven't shared it, because,
right now, we're the only
ones who are claiming
that Iran is not in --
or we would be the only
ones claiming that.
That would not put us
in a strong position.
If we were to do that, and
that is it, and continue to
honor the deal, it would be a
hiccup.
It would once again signal
to the world that we have a
rather erratic administration.
If he were then to impose
sanctions, to reimpose
the sanctions that were
lifted, reimpose sanctions
on Iran's nuclear program,
then we would be in breach.
And either Iran would itself
say we're not only bound by
our own commitments, and we
have a possibility of Iran
trying to acquire a nuclear
bomb, or we would be isolated in
the international
community, because the
Europeans, the Russians,
the Chinese, everyone would
say, it's on you.
It's not on Iran.
Why would we want that?
JOHN YANG: Mark Dubowitz, let
me -- I want you to respond.
What would happen?
What practically would
happen if the president
said they weren't complying?
And then what should
the next step be?
MARK DUBOWITZ: Well, actually,
practically speaking, what
Rob's not telling you is that,
if the president says they're
not complying, but he doesn't
say that they're in material
breach, then actually
nothing happens.
Then we don't go to
the joint commission.
We don't snap back U.N.
and U.S. sanctions.
We merely say Iran is engaging
in incremental violations.
And we know that the Iranians
violate incrementally,
not egregiously, even
though, over time, the
sum total of the incremental
violations is always egregious.
What Rob's not telling
you is that he knows and
we know that the Iranians
have been incrementally
violating this deal.
They have exceeded
heavy water caps.
Heavy water is the
essential ingredient you
need for a plutonium bomb.
They're testing more advanced
centrifuges than they are
permitted under the nuclear
agreement.
They have been illicitly
procuring nuclear and ballistic
missile technology in Germany,
according to German
intelligence services.
And they have exceeded
their enrichment cap.
So, the fact of the matter
is, there are violations.
They're not material breaches.
They're incremental violations.
The president should state
that, certify that, and say
Iran is not in full compliance.
Now, the second step is to say
whether it's a material breach.
And it's.
It's not a material breach.
And he should move ahead with
the maximum pressure campaign.
JOHN YANG: Mark
Dubowitz, I'm sorry.
We're out of time.
Mark Dubowitz, Rob Malley, we're
going to have to leave it there.
Thank you, gentlemen.
ROB MALLEY: Thank you.
MARK DUBOWITZ: Thanks so much.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
the former government
ethics director who
resigned after clashing
with the Trump administration;
striking new findings linking
brain injury directly to
football; and a profile of
Trump supporters living in a
place known for being liberal.
The battle to retake Mosul
from ISIS is nearing its end.
And yet a new deadly campaign is
under way by some Iraqi forces
of revenge and retribution
against those suspected to
have fought for or aided ISIS.
From Northern Iraq, special
correspondent Marcia Biggs and
videographer Alessandro Pavone
report.
And a warning: Images and
accounts in this story
may disturb some viewers.
MARCIA BIGGS: It starts at dawn
here in West Mosul, members
of Iraqi special forces going
door to door in search
of ISIS sleeper cells.
Clashes continue in a small
pocket of the Old City, but for
most of Mosul, this is where
the fight against ISIS stands.
In some houses, we find the
remnants of life under ISIS.
This was a Da'esh
prison, he says.
So this was once the home
of a local politician.
When ISIS took the area, they
turned his house into a jail.
ISIS imprisoned anyone
who didn't pledge loyalty
to them, who didn't
join them and stick to
their rules, this
lieutenant says.
They considered them outlaws.
After several hours searching,
they come across this man, who
they believe may have escaped
the current clashes
in the Old City.
He is arrested immediately.
Do you believe he
is an ISIS fighter?
MAN (through translator):
I think he is.
He is not from this area.
No one has ever seen here.
People here don't know him.
He is very thin, and
the I.D. card is fake.
So, probably he is ISIS.
MAN (through translator):
For no reason, the militias
took my son five months ago.
We don't know where.
We are not ISIS.
My son is a shepherd.
If we were ISIS, you
could come and kill me.
Ask anyone here.
(GUNFIRE)
MARCIA BIGGS: Just last week,
this photo emerged of suspected
ISIS fighters rounded up and
held in a small dark room in
the 120-degree heat, an eye for
an eye, as the captors become
captive.
Dr. Mansour Maarouf Mansour
was working in Qayyarah General
Hospital when this video
was taken last spring.
The hospital was inundated
with unidentified bodies
coming down the Tigris River.
The morgue could barely
handle the grim deluge.
A local resident described the
what he saw at the riverbank.
MAN (through translator):
They had their hands
tied behind their backs.
They were blindfolded
and shot in the head.
They were floating
down the river.
MARCIA BIGGS: And just last
week, even more bodies.
You received a lot of bodies
that looked to have been the
victims of execution, is that
right?
MAN: Yes.
MARCIA BIGGS: What was the state
of the bodies that you received?
DR.
MANSOUR MAAROUF MANSOUR, Iraq:
Yes, most of them were killed
by shooting to the head.
It's very little in compared
to those who were killed by
the liberation process, through
the mines, land mines,
or the bombs, mortar
bombs, or airstrike.
MARCIA BIGGS: The number
of civilian casualties
has been staggering.
Former Kurdish Deputy Prime
Minister Hoshyar Zebari says
at least 40,000 dead, many of
them at the hands of coalition
airstrikes, which include both
Iraqi and American firepower.
As residents return
home to a Mosul depleted
of ISIS fighters, the
new campaign may be
one of collective
punishment against possible
ISIS sympathizers.
We traveled to a village just
south of the city, where many
of the residents collaborated
with ISIS.
We had heard reports of
so-called revenge death squads
coming for them in the dead of
night.
Um Nazim's husband was a taxi
driver, and she says he just
joined the group to survive.
He was later killed
in an airstrike.
She was too scared to let
us show her full face.
UM NAZIM, Iraq (through
translator): They told us, if
your sons and husbands do not
declare loyalty, we will bring
back the religious police
and we will behead them.
He was an old man when we were
threatened, so he was scared.
He thought it would be
better to declare loyalty.
It is better than being killed.
MARCIA BIGGS: Since the
liberation of her town
from ISIS, she says
local militias have
threatened her, demanding
that she leave, even shooting
up and raiding her home.
UM NAZIM (through translator):
We have lost our minds.
Every night when we sleep,
we don't know if we will
be alive in the morning.
What is our life?
We were all throwing their
clothes in bags, but we
didn't know where to go.
We don't have money to
leave or even to rent a car.
I don't know what
to do, where to go.
I was pacing back and
forth in the front yard.
I told them, kill me.
It's better than this.
Come on and kill me
and end my suffering.
MARCIA BIGGS: The Iraqi
government maintains that any
abuse is being dealt with in due
process, and Iraqi commanders
admit the mistakes.
MAJ.
GEN.
NAJIM AL-JUBOURI, Iraqi
Commander: We don't lead eagles.
We lead humans.
I mean, our soldiers,
our police, they are
human, not eagles.
Maybe someone make some bad
thing, but the majority, the
general of our forces deal very
good with the people.
MARCIA BIGGS: So what do you
do when you find out one of
your men has been part of this
abuse?
MAJ.
GEN.
NAJIM AL-JUBOURI: We put
him in the jail, and we
send him to the court.
e
MARCIA BIGGS: Do you worry about
revenge attacks creating an
atmosphere that would make Iraq
vulnerable to another ISIS?
MAJ.
GEN.
NAJIM AL-JUBOURI: Yes,
I worry about that.
We try to push the local
government to put some
solution to these things.
MARCIA BIGGS: Human rights
groups say this is not enough.
TOM PORTEOUS, Deputy Program
Director, Human Rights Watch:
The Iraqi government sometimes
responds to our reports and
our advocacy by making the
right sort of noises and making
the right kinds of statements,
but it's never followed up with
a proper procedure to secure
accountability for the
abuses that we document.
You can win the war militarily
against the Islamic State,
but if you are continuing to
commit abuses with impunity,
then you are simply sowing
the seeds for the reemergence
of extremism and
radicalism in Iraq.
MARCIA BIGGS: Like many Sunni
Arabs that lived under ISIS, Um
Nazim feels she is under siege
by the Shia-dominated government
and militias that fought and
won the battle against ISIS.
Do you hope that
ISIS will come back?
UM NAZIM (through translator):
I don't hope that ISIS will
come back, but there was peace
and no one interfered in
the life of anyone else.
No one oppressed anyone.
The situation was calmer.
MARCIA BIGGS: For you, but
for those who weren't part of
ISIS, they were very scared.
UM NAZIM (through translator):
No, no one in Iraq was scared.
Everybody was living in peace
under ISIS, not just us, because
my husband was with ISIS.
MARCIA BIGGS: But
how can you say that?
We have heard so many stories
of people who were killed,
people who were repressed, who
couldn't go to school?
UM NAZIM (through
translator): I don't know.
I didn't go out.
I didn't see anything.
I'm only responsible for
myself, not for others.
I didn't see anyone kill
anyone else in front of me.
I heard people say that
others were killed, but
who knows who killed them.
MARCIA BIGGS: What do you say
to the children whose parents
were killed by ISIS suicide
bombers?
UM NAZIM (through
translator): I don't know.
I didn't see.
I wasn't with ISIS to
know anything about that.
ISIS became a state
and a government.
Who can say anything to
them under their rule?
MARCIA BIGGS: Like many under
occupation, Um Nazim turned a
blind eye in order to ensure
her own safety.
The dust is beginning
to settle in Mosul, but
revenge can be a dirty game.
The battle may have ended,
but a new war in Iraq
may be just beginning.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm Marcia Biggs in
and around Mosul, Iraq.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Earlier this
month, Walter Shaub resigned
as director of the federal
Office of Government
Ethics, a position he's
held since January 2013.
In the final months of his
tenure, Shaub clashed with the
Trump administration on a number
of ethics issues.
Currently, he is senior
director of ethics for the
nonprofit Campaign Legal Center.
And Mr. Shaub joins me now.
Thank you for being
here at the "NewsHour."
So, you had been -- you were
just telling me you had been
at the Office of Government
Ethics for, what, 15, 16 years?
WALTER SHAUB, Campaign
Legal Center: Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Leading up
to your decision to resign.
You had another six months to
go as director of the office.
Why leave?
Why not stay until
the end, next January?
WALTER SHAUB: Well, first of
all, thanks for having me.
I started at OGE in 2001 and
have served there continuously,
except for two years, when I
left.
I have seen OGE operate
under three different
presidential administrations
right now, including
the administrations of President
Bush and President Obama, who
were incredibly supportive
of the ethics program.
Both of those administrations
really supported OGE
in absolutely every
way they could, and
our work functioned
very smoothly.
In the past eight
months, we have departed
from ethical norms.
And the program is under
significant pressure
from the White House
that has set a tone there
the top that ethics
doesn't matter.
And so I did all I could,
and I reached a point where
I thought there wasn't more I
could achieve from inside.
But, by leaving, I would
actually have more freedom to
continue to try to push for the
restoration of our
ethics program.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you have
been speaking out since then.
Give us an example of the way or
ways that this administration,
as you say, was putting
stress on the ethics procedures.
WALTER SHAUB: Well, in one
way, it really began with the
president declaring that he's
not going to divest his
financial interests.
And that means there is a
cloud over all government
decision-making that
stems from the president,
because you can't know whether
his decisions are being made
on the basis of policy aims
or on the basis of
financial interests.
And when he travels to all of
his properties on a frequent
basis, he's giving each of them
free advertisements, and he
speaks freely about those.
He could have, instead,
divested his interests and
told his administration
to stay away there
his properties, which would
have kept some of the foreign
governments or charities or
businesses that have booked his
business -- his properties to
be closer to the president not
to do that.
I think a lot of things happen
on a day-to-day basis as well.
I fought a battle that took
over a month to get them to
release some waivers that they
had been issuing, and OGE's
collection of waivers...
JUDY WOODRUFF: To individuals.
WALTER SHAUB: To
individual appointees.
And OGE's collection of waivers
and other ethics documents
has been a routine function
of OGE's program dating all
the way back to its beginning.
OGE is by statute the
supervising Ethics Office.
When I finally got the waivers,
I was shocked to see that a
number of them, most of them,
actually, were unsigned,
undated, either explicitly
or implicitly retroactive,
and two of them
were issued by the counselor
of the president to a group of
people that included himself.
So, that's about as bad an
ethics program as you can run.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, now you
know that -- what the White
House has been saying since you
left your position.
They were criticizing
you before.
They have been
criticizing since.
They say you have been
talking to the news media.
I saw one quote where they
said you were "grandstanding,"
that you're trying to
give additional powers
to the Ethics Office
that it never had before.
WALTER SHAUB: Well, I
do think that, based
on recent experiences,
the Ethics Office needs
more power than it's had before,
because its functions depended
on a White House that wanted
to support the ethics program.
So, when they threw roadblocks
in the way of the supervising
Ethics Office's ability
to again access to
routine ethics documents,
that was a clear signal
that OGE didn't have
enough ability to
carry out its mission.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And then very
recently, Walter Shaub, you
have spoken out about the person
who has been named the
acting director of the
Ethics Office since you left.
Why the concern there?
WALTER SHAUB: So, you know, I
want to make clear that I think
that individual, Dave Apol,
is a good person and
an excellent attorney.
I hired him because he has got
a particular viewpoint, which
is at odds with the traditional
interpretation of the ethics
role that OGE has always had,
because I wanted diversity
of opinion.
And it worked well while I was
in charge because I had two see
senior officials who had very
differing opinions, and we
could have robust debate.
And Dave was always
very respectful when a
decision was finally made.
But I am concerned that he has
a particular outlook, that he
would wind up loosening the
ethics rules and
OGE's interpretations.
And, to be clear, I would have
no problem if they nominated
him, so the Senate could
vet these viewpoints.
But I think that the
administration did
an end-run around the
natural succession of the
chief of staff to appoint
one of her subordinates
as acting director in
order to avoid the Senate
confirmation process and have
someone in the office who is
sympathetic to their views.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Just
very quickly, in the
time that we have left,
you are trying now, as
we said, to beef up the
Office of Government Ethics.
You're working with members
of Congress from both
political parties to do this.
Just in a quick nutshell,
what do you think needs to
be done, needs to be added?
WALTER SHAUB: So, there's a
number of measures I'm proposing
to try to get OGE a little bit
more independence, including
the ability to gather records
and information, if necessary,
by issuing subpoenas.
I also think that there's
a number of tweaks that can
be done to the ethics rules.
And, ultimately, I would like
to see some accountability
for resolving presidential
conflicts of interest.
That last one might be a
tougher sell, but some of the
proposals are technical enough
that they shouldn't
be controversial.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, I hope
we can stay in touch with
you as you work on this.
Walter Shaub, the former
director of the office
of Government Ethics,
thank you very much.
WALTER SHAUB: Thanks
for having me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now: A new study
raises even stronger concerns
about the risks of brain
injury from the country's most
popular professional sport.
It's the focus of our weekly
segment the Leading Edge.
And Hari Sreenivasan has the
story from our New York studios.
HARI SREENIVASAN: We have
known about the dangers of
hard hits and concussions from
football, and that many
players are suffering
from CTE, or chronic
traumatic encephalopathy.
But, yesterday, the largest
study to date concluded that
110 of 111 former NFL players
who had died and donated
their brains had CTE.
These included former
greats such as quarterback
Kenny Stabler and
linebacker Dave Duerson.
Researchers also looked at the
brains of 202 former players,
including high school and
college athletes; 87 percent
were found to have CTE.
The NFL released a statement.
It said in part: "We appreciate
the work for the value it
adds in the ongoing quest for
a better understanding of CTE.
The NFL will continue to work
with a wide range of experts
to improve the health of
current and former
NFL athletes."
Michael Alosco is a co-author
of the study from the Boston
University CTE Center.
Michael, thanks for joining us.
You and your researchers point
out that this is not a random
sample, that the group of
brains that you were studying
either came directly from
the athletes or from members
of their family who thought
there might be something wrong.
That said, what does this
information tell you?
What does this data point to?
MICHAEL ALOSCO, Boston
University CTE Center:
This is the largest case
series study to date
of CTE.
You know, it's among
football players.
The sheer numbers, the sheer
size of the individuals who
had CTE is really concerning.
It's really suggesting a link
between prior participation
in football and CTE.
It's really going to serve as
a foundation, as a rich data
source going forward to really
study this disease and
figuring out what causes
it and identifying the
risk factors and to
really better understand it.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Help
us understand what
CTE does to the brain.
MICHAEL ALOSCO: It's a
neurodegenerative disease,
so a neurodegenerative
disease similar to
Alzheimer's, but it's
very distinct from
Alzheimer's disease.
What we see in CTE is
this protein called tau.
Tau is a protein that helps
stabilize the cell, but in
CTE, it becomes abnormal.
And, specifically, it
starts to collect around
the blood vessels.
And it's located at the base of
the (INAUDIBLE) kind of right
below the bottom of the tissue
of the brain.
And it's a really
unique presentation.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, Michael,
I know you sent us a slide.
We're going to put
that on the screen.
On the left-hand side, you kind
of see a cross-section of a
brain that's almost off-white.
And then, on the
right-hand side, you see
a lot more dark edges.
And that, I suppose,
is where the CTE is.
But what -- how does this
affect a player's behavior?
MICHAEL ALOSCO: We see
a lot of different types
of symptoms in CTE.
A lot of them are nonspecific,
meaning that, you know, we see
these symptoms across various
conditions.
However, in CTE, we're
commonly seeing behavior
changes, so we're seeing
aggressive behaviors,
violent behaviors.
We're seeing changes in
mood, like depression.
And we're also seeing changes
in thinking and memory.
What we need to identify is what
symptoms are specific to CTE.
And by doing that, it will
help us diagnose CTE in life
and really characterize it.
HARI SREENIVASAN: One of the
things I found interesting was
that you actually found this
in high school players.
And so that means that this
wasn't just the big-time NFL
superstars that were hitting
each other with tremendous
force, but does this
have a cumulative effect?
MICHAEL ALOSCO: That was
actually really surprising
to us as well is, we're
finding CTE kind of
across the levels of play going
from high school up to the
people who play professionally,
as you mentioned.
But we don't know how
much is too much yet.
You know, we don't know
what it means if you just
play high school football.
We don't know what that means
in terms of risk for CTE.
We did find it in
three individuals.
But we need to, you know,
identify those people
and follow them over
time to see what happens
to them.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Speaking of
that, while this is obviously
the gold standard, you have
someone's brain to
work with, but that's,
unfortunately, posthumously.
Is there anything that
science is doing now to
be able to detect and
diagnose and intervene
while a player is still alive?
MICHAEL ALOSCO: Right now, we
can only diagnose CTE after
death, as you mentioned.
Our work at Boston University
is also, though, studying living
subjects, and we're trying
to identify tools that look
at the brain, that look at
different proteins in the blood,
trying to identify these tools
that can detect CTE in life.
And we're really hopeful that,
you know, in the next five
or seven years, we will make
a lot of progress on that front.
HARI SREENIVASAN: It's important
to point out you're not
just focused on NFL players.
You have actually the
brains of athletes from
other sports as well?
MICHAEL ALOSCO: Right.
So, the paper that we're
talking about is all
about football players.
But, really, it's a brain bank
for all individuals who had some
type of exposure to repetitive
head impacts.
HARI SREENIVASAN: I think one
of the questions that parents
want to know is, should I pull
my child out of football?
MICHAEL ALOSCO: So,
that's the million-dollar
question we always get.
And it's a very tough question,
and the reason being is, we
know there's a lot of benefits
associated with playing sports
and participating in sports.
But this study and our findings,
they raise a lot of concern.
But we need to do
more future research.
We need to know more about the
disease, more about the risk
factors for the disease before
we can really make any
informed recommendations
about policy or about safety.
We need to learn more.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Michael Alosco, thanks so
much for joining us today.
MICHAEL ALOSCO: Thank
you for having me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We turn now to
the second half of our series on
political divisions in unlikely
places.
In May, "NewsHour" producer
Elizabeth Flock wrote about a
group of women in a conservative
West Virginia coal mining town
who spoke out against President
Trump and received backlash
from their neighbors.
Her new piece, out this week,
is an in-depth look at a group
of conservative women trying
to find their voice in a city
known for its progressive
politics, Portland, Oregon.
And Liz joins me now.
Liz, welcome back.
You were in Portland for
several days and just got back.
Why did you choose that city?
ELIZABETH FLOCK: In part, I
chose Portland just because
it was a progressive city, and
I was really interested to see,
what is it like to be a Trump
supporter in such a liberal
place?
But there had also been a
number of recent pro-Trump
rallies even after the election
in Portland and the surrounding
area, and those had ended in
some violent clashes between
the left and the right.
And so I was really interested
to see what was going on there.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we
actually covered --
covered some of those.
How did you find these women?
How did you get in touch with
them and how easy was it to
get them to trust you, to talk
to you?
ELIZABETH FLOCK: Yes.
Well, I found all of them online
through pro-Trump Facebook
groups, Women for Trump.
It was really hard
to gain their trust.
A lot of them had no
interested in speaking to me.
There is a perception that the
media is very liberal, very
biased, produces fake news.
Some of them said they'd
speak to me and later
made the decision that
they didn't want to.
And one of the women I met in
a public park because she said:
"I'm concerned about meeting
you.
I don't know what you're
going to do when I meet you.
Maybe you will try to hurt me.
I think we should met
in a public place."
So there was a lot of
fear of the media and
how they're portrayed.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tell us about
what it's like for them?
What do they go through as they
express their political views?
ELIZABETH FLOCK: Well,
they certainly get a lot of
pushback for their beliefs.
And some of them do have more
extreme beliefs, to be certain.
Others hold more moderate
views, but they're all sort of
clumped together as one thing.
They're called racists
and bigots regularly.
And they're attacked online.
They're told that
they should go die.
One woman told me, one day,
when she was walking her dog and
wearing a Trump hat, a man just
stopped to say to her: "Your
kind isn't wanted here.
You should just leave."
And if they go to these
rallies, they face even
more of an extreme reaction.
Many people in Portland, in the
Pacific Northwest come out to
counterprotest these rallies.
And some of them are
more liberal Portlanders
who just want to say,
I don't agree with what
you have to say.
But others are militant leftists
that show up and basically
say, we're unapologetic about
using physical violence
against these Trump supporters.
And, certainly, violence happens
on both sides, but the militant
leftists are very unapologetic
and open about it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I think, for
people who didn't realize
it, it's eye-opening.
One of the women you talked
to, Liz, is transgender.
ELIZABETH FLOCK: Yes.
Her name is Athena Brown.
And Athena switched parties
from being a Democrat
to being a Republican
in mid-2016, just before
the election.
She became fed up, she said,
with what she saw as political
correctness on the left and
in the liberal LGBT community.
And she told me: "You know,
when I became - - when I came
out as transgender, I lost
two friends.
When I came out as Republican,
I lost 100 friends on Facebook."
And so she really saw that
as an example of the left's
intolerance to people who do not
share their views.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How do
these women keep going?
In that environment, where
they are such a minority,
what keeps them going?
How do they deal with it?
ELIZABETH FLOCK: I think they're
actually invigorated by the
pushback that they're getting.
I think they really feel that
it's worth, it's important to
go out and defend what they
see as an attack on free speech.
And, you know, one of the
interesting things I saw is, as
the left tried to shut down what
they had to say, these Trump
supporters, these women were
more determined to go out and to
speak.
They just wanted to get more
active and became more even
strident in their beliefs.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, in a way,
it was a mirror image of the
anti-Trump women you talked to
in conservative West Virginia.
ELIZABETH FLOCK: Absolutely.
In both places, I think, as
people tried to shut down what
they had to say, these women
just wanted to speak out louder.
They wanted to get more
involved and more active.
But, in both places, it felt
like people on opposite sides
of the political divide were
not speaking to each other.
They were speaking past each
other, and there was no interest
in really hearing what the
other side had to say.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Discouraging,
but some great reporting.
Liz Flock, thank you very much.
ELIZABETH FLOCK: Thanks.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you
can find Liz's full
reports on our Web site.
That's PBS.org/NewsHour.
And that is the
"NewsHour" for tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again
right here tomorrow evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank you,
and we will see you soon.